Evaluation Warning: The document was created with Spire.Doc for .NET.
AQUA 4104
(Fish Nutrition)

TYPE AND PURPOSE:	This course is designed to provide an understanding of nutrient
requirements and feed practices for finfish.

CALENDAR ENTRY:	Introduction to Fish Nutrition Studies; Feeding Habits and Adaptations;
Nutrient Requirements; Diet Formulation; Larval Feeds; Food Requirements; Feeding Practices; Natural Foods in Extensive Culture; Growth and Feeding; Current Developments
PREREQUISITES:	SC 1807 (Safety in Science Lab (Lab Safety)) and SC 1808 (WHMIS)
SCHEDULE:	Duration:	13 weeks (3 lectures/laboratories per week)
COURSE AIMS:	1)	To provide student with an understanding of the principles which
underlie the development, formulation and commercial manufacture of fish feeds.

2)  To enable students to evaluate and manage the effective use of fish feeds.

3)  To make students aware of current research activities and commercial developments.

EVALUATION:	Laboratory Report	15%

Assignments
* Term Paper	17.5%
* Feed Formulation	17.5% (includes Participation mark)

Midterm Exam	15%

Final Exam	35%


Total

100%
MAJOR TOPICS:
1.0
Introduction to Fish Nutrition Studies


2.0
Feeding Habits and Adaptations


3.0
Nutrient Requirements


4.0
Diet Formulation


5.0
Larval Feeds


6.0
Food Requirements


7.0
Feeding Practices


8.0
Natural Foods in Extensive Culture


9.0
Growth and Feeding


10.0
Current Developments



©Marine Institute
School of Fisheries GSC Approved - Rev. May/2019

2	AQUA 4104 (Fish Nutrition)

COURSE OUTLINE:
1.0  Introduction to Fish Nutrition Studies
1.1  Historical Developments
1.2  Current Use of Feeds in Aquaculture

2.0  Feeding Habits and Adaptations
2.1  Natural Food Organisms
2.2  Anatomical and Physiological Adaptions
2.3  Feeding Behaviour
2.4  Appetite and Feeding Rhythms

3.0  Nutrient Requirements
3.1  Nutritional Energetics
3.2  Proteins
3.3  Lipids
3.4  Carbohydrates
3.5  Digestibility, Absorption and Assimilation
3.6  Vitamins
3.7  Minerals

4.0  Diet Formulation
4.1  Major Ingredients
4.2  Non-Nutrient Dietary Ingredients
4.3  Formulation Techniques
4.4  Formulations
4.5  Diet Manufacture

5.0  Larval Feeds
5.1  Cultured Food Organisms
5.2  Artificial Larval Diets

6.0  Food Requirements
6.1  Feed Selection
6.2  Daily Rations
6.3  Feeding Frequency

7.0  Feeding Practices
7.1  Feed Handling and Storage
7.2  Feed Delivery Systems

8.0  Natural Foods in Extensive Culture
8.1  Food Chains in Fish Culture Ponds
8.2  Pond Fertility
8.3  Productivity Enhancement


©Marine Institute
School of Fisheries GSC Approved - Rev. May/2019

AQUA 4104 (Fish Nutrition)	3

9.0  Growth and Feeding
9.1  Dietary Evaluation
9.2  Growth Monitoring
9.3  Growth Prediction Models

10.0  Current Developments
10.1  Current Trends in Research and Development


©Marine Institute
School of Fisheries GSC Approved - Rev. May/2019

4	AQUA 4104 (Fish Nutrition)

LEARNING OBJECTIVES:
THE EXPECTED LEARNING OUTCOME IS THAT THE STUDENT WILL BE ABLE TO:

1.0  Introduction to Fish Nutrition Studies
1.1  Historical Developments
– Outline the historical developments of fish feeds.
a)  Natural foods	b)	Moist feeds
c)	Dry feeds
1.2  Current Use of Feeds in Aquaculture
– Identify the role of feeds in modern aquaculture.
a)  Intensive culture	b)	Semi-intensive culture
c)	Extensive culture

2.0  Feeding Habits and Adaptations
2.1  Natural Food Organisms
* Identify the feeding habits and natural food organisms of representative fish species.
2.2  Anatomical and Physiological Adaptions
* Describe the form and function of the teleost alimentary system.
* Outline the digestive physiology of the teleost alimentary system.
* Recognize anatomical and physiological adaptations of representative teleost fish in relation to diet.
2.3  Feeding Behaviour
* Describe the components of feeding behaviour in representative fish species.
* Describe the stimuli which initiate feeding responses.
* Describe the physiological, social and environmental factors which regular appetite.
* Outline the factors which control feeding rhythmicity in fish.

3.0  Nutrient Requirements
3.1  Nutritional Energetics
– Outline the role of dietary energy sources in fish food.
a)  Lipids	b)	Proteins
c)	Carbohydrates
* Define “units of energy measurement'.
* Define
a)	Gross Energy	b)	Digestive Energy
c)	Metabolisable Energy	d)	Physiological Fuel Values
* Measure the gross energy content of feeds and feedstuffs.
* Describe the metabolic pathways of ingested energy.
* Describe the derived energy requirements of representative fish species.
a)	Basic metabolism	b)	Routine metabolism
c)	Active metabolism
3.2  Proteins
* Understand the nature of proteins and their roles in the metabolism of fish.
* Identify the qualitative and quantitative amino acid requirements of cultures fish species.
* Describe the availability of amino acids in typical feed ingredients.
* Identify the major sources of protein used as ingredients in fish feeds.
* Understand the concept of “protein sparing” in diet formulation.


©Marine Institute
School of Fisheries GSC Approved - Rev. May/2019

AQUA 4104 (Fish Nutrition)	5

3.3  Fats
* Understand the nature of fats and their role in the metabolism of fish.
* Identify the qualitative and quantitative fatty acid requirements of cultured fish species.
a)  Energy sources	b)	Essential fatty acid sources
* Identify major lipid sources used as ingredients in fish feeds.
3.4  Carbohydrates
* Understand the nature of carbohydrates and their role I the metabolism of fish.
* Understand the nutritional and non-nutritional roles of carbohydrates in fish feeds.
a)  Energy sources	b)	Fibre sources
c)	Binding agents	d)	Bulking agents
3.5  Digestibility, Absorption and Assimilation
* Understand the fate of ingested food material.
* Determine the apparent digestibility of feed ingredients.
* Determine the biological value of ingested food.
* Calculate:
a)  Protein Efficiency Ratio (P.E.R.)  b)	Net Protein Utilisation (N.P.U.)
c)	Net Protein Value (N.P.V.)
3.6  Vitamins
* Understand the origins, nature and biological roles of vitamins.
* Outline the qualitative and quantitative vitamin requirements of cultured fish species.
* List the symptoms of vitamin deficiencies.
* List natural sources of vitamins used as ingredients in fish feeds.
* Understand the use of vitamin-mineral pre-mixes in formulated feeds.
3.7  Minerals
* Understand the major roles of minerals in the metabolism of fish.
* Outline the nutritional requirements of fish for dietary minerals.
* List the symptoms of mineral deficiencies.

4.0  Diet Formulation
4.1  Ingredients
* Selection of raw materials. List sources of information concerning ingredient specifications.
* List typical nutrients used in the formulation of fish feeds.
4.2  Non-Nutrient Dietary Ingredients
* Detail the nature and functions of the non-nutrient components of feeds.
a)  Natural and synthetic binding agents.
b)  Anti-oxidants
c)  Natural and synthetic pigments
d)  Anti-fungal agents
* Understand the legal and ethical constraints relating to dietary ingredients.
4.3  Formulation Techniques
* Understand the principles of diet formulation in terms of nutrient balance.
* Understand the principles of “least-cost” formulation techniques.
* Apply the use of computers to diet formulation.


©Marine Institute
School of Fisheries GSC Approved - Rev. May/2019

6	AQUA 4104 (Fish Nutrition)

4.4  Diet Manufacture
* Formulate and manufacture experimental fish diets.
* Outline the principles of commercial diet manufacturing techniques.
4.5  Commercial Diets
* Understand the differences in composition and the specific uses of the various types of commercially manufactured diets.

a)	Fry and fingerling feeds
b)
Grower diets
c)	Broodstock diets
d)
Pigmented feeds
e)	Medicated feeds



5.0  Larval Feeds
5.1  Cultured Food Organisms
– Describe the use of live food organisms in the culture of fish larvae.
a)  Algae	b)	Rotifers
c)	Crustaceans
5.2  Artificial Larval Diets
– Outline current developments in the use of artificial larval diets in fish culture.
a)  Micro-particulate diets	b)	Micro-encapsulated diets

6.0  Food Requirements
6.1  Feed Selection
* Select appropriate feeds in accordance with the specific requirements of farmed fish.
6.2  Daily Food Requirements
* Calculate the daily food requirements of fish stocks.
* Plan long-term feed requirements.
* Recognize the symptoms of overfeeding and underfeeding fish.
* Understand the deleterious effects of uneaten, or poorly digested food, on the aquatic environment.
6.3  Feeding Frequency
* Determine optimal feeding frequency in farmed fish stocks, in accordance with fish species, size, food type and rearing conditions.

7.0  Feeding Practices
7.1  Feed Handling and Storage
* Recognize the correct storage and handling procedures for fish feeds.
* Understand the problems associated with the deterioration of fish feeds during prolonged or incorrect storage.
7.2  Feed Delivery Systems
* Understand the relative advantages and disadvantages of the various methods available for delivering feed to fish.
a) Hand feeding	b)	Demand feeding
c) Automated feeding

8.0  Natural Foods in Extensive Culture
8.1  Food Chains in Fish Culture Ponds
* Describe typical food chains supporting fish production in extensive pond culture.
8.2  Pond Fertility
* Describe methods available for the estimation of pond fertility.


©Marine Institute
School of Fisheries GSC Approved - Rev. May/2019

AQUA 4104 (Fish Nutrition)	7

8.3  Productivity Enhancement
* Describe techniques for the enhancement of fish productivity in extensive pond culture.

a)	Use of organic manures
b)
Use of inorganic fertilizers
c)	Supplementary feeding
d)
Polyculture

9.0  Growth and Feeding
9.1  Dietary Evaluation
– Determine food conversion efficiency in relation to ration formulation, ration size and abiotic factors.
a)  Temperature	b)	Salinity
c)	Light	d)	Oxygen
9.2  Growth Monitoring
* Determine specific growth rates in relation to ration size, ration formulation and abiotic factors.
* Measure fish condition factors.
9.3  Growth Prediction Models
– Apply models to predict the growth of farmed fish stocks.

10.0  Current Developments
10.1  Current Trends in Research and Development
– Recognize current trends in research and development. Examples:
a)  Investigations of the specific nutritional requirements of broodstock fish.
b)  Commercial development of artificial larval feeds.
c)  Assessment of lipid content in salmon diets.
d)  Development of “low pollution” diets through improved digestibility of dietary ingredients.
* To understand the significance to aquaculture of new research findings.
* To apply new knowledge in the commercial production of fish through aquaculture.©Marine Institute
School of Fisheries GSC Approved - Rev. May/2019

