Evaluation Warning: The document was created with Spire.Doc for .NET.
AQUACULTURE WORK EXPERIENCE
(SRS# 500539)



©Marine Institute
School of Fisheries NPC Approved - Rev. Nov./2012

TYPE AND PURPOSE:




PREREQUISITES:













SCHEDULE: COURSE AIMS:





EVALUATION:

This work experience is designed to provide the student with practical experience in salmonid or mussel farm operations. To meet the graduation requirements of the Technical Certificate in Aquaculture, the student must successfully complete the Aquaculture Work Experience.

For those enrolled in the Technical Certificate in Aquaculture (Salmonid), successful completion of core courses:

Small Vessel Operator Proficiency (SFTY 1102); Marine Basic First Aid (SFTY 1125);
Salmonid Biology and Husbandry (SRS# 500524) Salmonid Feeds and Feeding (SRS# 500525); and Salmonid Health and Biosecurity (SRS# 500526).

For those enrolled in the Technical Certificate in Aquaculture (Mussel), successful completion of core courses:

Small Vessel Operator Proficiency (SFTY 1102); Marine Basic First Aid (SFTY 1125);
Mussel Spat Collection and General Biology (SRS# 500534); Mussel Farm Stocking Capacity (SRS# 500535); and
Mussel Harvesting, Handling and Processing (SRS# 500536). Minimum of 175 hours (25 days)
The aims of this work experience are to:

1)  Enable the student to practice skills obtained during the course component of the Technical Certificate in Aquaculture.

2)  Instill positive employment skills appropriate to the aquaculture industry.

The employer evaluation and the student work book comprise the work term evaluation. Students must pass both elements in order to successfully complete the Aquaculture Work Experience.

PLEASE NOTE:

The employer assesses on-the-job performance by using the Marine Institute Employer Evaluation Form; this form is included in the Aquaculture Work Experience Work Book.

If necessary, the Placement Officer may contact the employer to clarify information on an evaluation.

The student is required to complete the Aquaculture Work Experience Work Book; it must be submitted to the Placement Office within 10 days of work experience completion. It will then be forwarded it to the Program Chair.


©Marine Institute
School of Fisheries NPC Approved - Rev. Nov./2012

2	Aquaculture Work Experience

The Aquaculture Work Experience Work Book includes an evaluation checklist of core competencies and skills required for salmonid or mussel farm operations.

Notwithstanding the Marine Institutes' General Guidelines for formal work terms, students shall be required to obtain a minimum overall mark of 70% to achieve pass status in this work experience.

The overall mark is comprised of the following weighting: Aquaculture Work Experience Work Book	70%
Employer Evaluation		30% Total	100%*


©Marine Institute
School of Fisheries NPC Approved - Rev. Nov./2012


FAILED WORK TERMS:
NOTE:	*Grade to be recorded as Pass or Fail.

Refer to the Marine Institute General Guidelines for Formal Work Terms, Evaluation.©Marine Institute
School of Fisheries NPC Approved - Rev. Nov./2012

