TYPE AND PURPOSE: CALENDAR ENTRY: PREREQUISITES: SCHEDULE: COURSE AIMS:
EVALUATION:
MAJOR TOPICS:

MENV 1100
(Sampling I)

This course will provide students with basic sampling skills to conduct oceanographic and intertidal sampling programsStudents will conduct practical laboratory and field exercises designed to complement theoretical course contentA fieldbook will be used to record field and laboratory activities.

Importance of Ocean and Coastal Processes; Skill Sets of Marine Researchers; Introduction to Sampling; Physical Oceanography; Chemical Oceanography; Biological Sampling

SC 1807 (Safety in Science Lab (Lab Safety)) and SC 1808 (WHMIS)

Duration:

5 Days (35 hours)

1) To enable students to carry out basic sampling of oceanographic and biological parameters.

2) To provide students with basic oceanographic processes pertaining to scientific inquiry.

3) To enable students to develop skill sets for marine science research.

4) To enable students to recognize challenges and limitations of field study.

Quiz

40%

Field book

25%

Labs

20%

Demonstrations

15%

Total

100%

1.0 Importance of Ocean and Coastal Processes

2.0 Skill Sets of Marine Researchers

3.0 Introduction to Sampling

4.0 Physical Oceanography

5.0 Chemical Oceanography

6.0 Biological Sampling

和arine Institute

School of Fisheries UGSC Approved - Rev. May/2019

2
COURSE OUTLINE:
1.0 Importance of Ocean and Coastal Processes 1.1 Contribution of Oceans to Human Development 1.2 Role of Oceans in Heat Energy Distribution 1.3 Biological Resources of Oceans
2.0 Skill Sets of Marine Researchers 2.1 Observation Skills 2.2 Recording Skills 2.3 Planning Skills 2.4 Interpersonal Skills
3.0 Introduction to Sampling 3.1 Distribution Patterns 3.2 Density Calculations 3.3 Bias in Sampling 3.4 Laboratory Procedures
4.0 Physical Oceanography 4.1 Physical Properties of Seawater 4.2 Air-Sea Interaction 4.3 Land-Sea Interaction 4.4 Currents 4.5 Waves 4.6 Tides
5.0 Chemical Oceanography 5.1 Composition Factors of Seawater 5.2 Dissolved Inorganic Matter 5.3 Dissolved Gases 5.4 Dissolved Organic Matter 5.5 Particulate Matter
6.0 Biological Sampling 6.1 Biogeography 6.2 Fish Anatomy 6.3 Fish Tagging 6.4 Tissue Sampling

MENV 1100 (Sampling I)

和arine Institute

School of Fisheries UGSC Approved - Rev. May/2019

MENV 1100 (Sampling I)

3

LEARNING OBJECTIVES:
THE EXPECTED LEARNING OUTCOME IS THAT THE STUDENT WILL BE ABLE TO:
1.0 Importance of Ocean and Coastal Processes 1.1 Contribution of Oceans to Human Development - Identify minerals and sediments from oceans that are used by humans. - Discuss the importance of oceans in trade and transportation. 1.2 Role of Oceans in Heat Energy Distribution - Explain the role of oceans in energy storage and distribution. - Describe the hydrological cycle. - Identify energy sources of the ocean. 1.3 Biological Resources of Oceans - Identify human food sources from oceans and coastal areas. - Identify useful food derivatives from ocean resources. - Discuss the importance of ocean resources in medical science and technology.
2.0 Skill Sets of Marine Researchers 2.1 Observation Skills - List the types of observations that are required for marine science research work. 2.2 Recording Skills - Differentiate between electronic recoding and manual recoding techniques. - Identify the importance of field notes. - Use a field notebook to record observations. 2.3 Planning Skills - Use tide charts, weather forecasts and available resources to plan and execute a field study. 2.4 Interpersonal Skills - List the personal attribute required of a field technician. - Identify the safety requirements for fieldwork.
3.0 Introduction to Sampling 3.1 Distribution Patterns - Compare random and non-random distribution for biological sampling. 3.2 Density Calculations - Calculate density for random and non-random samples. 3.3 Bias in Sampling - Define "bias", "Type I Error" and "Type II Error". 3.4 Laboratory Procedures - Carry out proper labelling procedures for samples. - Identify the importance of chain of command procedures. - Complete chain of custody forms.
4.0 Physical Oceanography 4.1 Physical Properties of Seawater - Define the physical properties of density, temperature and conductivity. - Describe the effects of seasons and latitudes on physical properties.

和arine Institute

School of Fisheries UGSC Approved - Rev. May/2019

4
4.2 Air-Sea Interaction - Describe the importance of wind circulation and climate.
4.3 Land-Sea Interaction - Describe land breeze and sea breeze formation. - Differentiate between maritime and continental climates.
4.4 Currents - Differentiate between wind driven and thermohaline circulation.
4.5 Waves - Identify the basic wave structure and movement. - Differentiate between sea, swell and surf.
4.6 Tides - Identify the causes of tides. - Differentiate between spring tides and neap tides. - Use tide charts to plan field activity.
5.0 Chemical Oceanography 5.1 Composition Factors of Seawater - Differentiate between constituents, sources, reactions and sinks. - List factors that impact the chemical makeup of seawater. 5.2 Dissolved Inorganic Matter - List the major inorganic components of seawater. 5.3 Dissolved Gases - List the major gases dissolved in seawater. - Identify the importance of the major gases on marine life. 5.4 Dissolved Organic Matter - List the sources of dissolved organic matter. - Identify the importance of dissolved organic matter on marine life. 5.5 Particulate Matter - Discuss the importance of particulate matter as a food source. - Identify particulate matter as biogenous sediment source.
6.0 Biological Sampling 6.1 Biogeography - Describe how abiotic factors influence species distribution. - Explain the significance of indicator species. - List common intertidal indicator species. 6.2 Fish Anatomy - Identify the major external characteristics of fin fish. - Name the major fins of common fin fish species. - Identify major internal fish organs. 6.3 Fish Tagging - Discuss the history of fish tagging. - Explain the advantages of tagging fish. - Demonstrate correct tagging technique.

MENV 1100 (Sampling I)

和arine Institute

School of Fisheries UGSC Approved - Rev. May/2019

MENV 1100 (Sampling I)

5

6.4 Tissue Sampling - Outline the type of information that can be obtained from samples of fish tissue. - List the equipment need to take tissue samples - Demonstrate procedure for taking blood samples, gonad, scale and organ samples. - Label sample containers for further lab analysis.

和arine Institute

School of Fisheries UGSC Approved - Rev. May/2019

